DAY 5 – JENKINS, GITHUB, DOCKER AND GHCR INTEGRATION

Objective

The main objective of Day 5 was to understand how Jenkins can be
integrated with GitHub and Docker to automate the process of obtaining
source code, building a Docker image, and running a Docker container. I
also learned how a Docker image can be stored in GitHub Container
Registry (GHCR) and pulled when required.

Tools Used

-   GitHub – Source code repository
-   Jenkins – Continuous Integration tool
-   Docker – Containerization platform
-   GitHub Container Registry (GHCR) – Storage for Docker images
-   Windows environment – Jenkins and Docker execution environment

1.  GitHub and Jenkins Integration

A Jenkins job named:

demo-integration-git-docker

was created and connected to the GitHub repository.

Jenkins was used to fetch the project files from the GitHub repository
into its workspace.

The Jenkins workspace contained files such as:

-   app.js
-   Dockerfile
-   day2.txt
-   initial.txt
-   rebasefile

This helped me understand how Jenkins can automatically obtain the
latest project files from GitHub before performing the build process.

2.  Jenkins Build and Workspace

The Jenkins job was executed multiple times during the setup and testing
process.

The Jenkins dashboard showed the build history, including successful and
failed builds. Build #12 was successfully completed.

The Jenkins workspace confirmed that the files from the GitHub
repository were available to Jenkins.

This demonstrated the basic Continuous Integration workflow:

GitHub Repository → Jenkins → Workspace

3.  Docker Integration with Jenkins

Docker commands were added to the Jenkins job under Build Steps.

The following Windows batch commands were used:

dir

docker build -t jenkinstest .

docker images

docker run -d –name jenkinstestcont -p 8084:80 jenkinstest

The purpose of these steps was:

-   dir – To check the files available in the Jenkins workspace.
-   docker build -t jenkinstest . – To build a Docker image using the
    Dockerfile in the workspace.
-   docker images – To verify that the Docker image was created
    successfully.
-   docker run -d –name jenkinstestcont -p 8084:80 jenkinstest – To
    create and run a container from the image and map port 8084 of the
    host to port 80 of the container.

Therefore, Jenkins was used to automate the Docker image creation and
container execution process.

4.  Docker Image

After the Docker build, the image named:

jenkinstest:latest

was created.

The Docker image was also tagged with the GHCR repository name:

ghcr.io/santhoshimary/jenkinstest:latest

The local Docker environment showed both the local image and the
GHCR-tagged image. Both referenced the same image ID:

73027eaa5784

and the image size was approximately 1.57 GB.

5.  GitHub Container Registry (GHCR)

I learned how GitHub Container Registry can be used to store Docker
images.

The Docker image was pushed to:

ghcr.io/santhoshimary/jenkinstest:latest

The image was available under the GitHub Packages section of the
account.

The GHCR package was named:

jenkinstest

and the latest image version was available in the package.

6.  Pulling the Docker Image from GHCR

The GHCR package page provided the command required to pull the image:

docker pull ghcr.io/santhoshimary/jenkinstest:latest

This showed how a Docker image stored in GHCR can be downloaded to a
Docker environment when required.

The basic process is:

GHCR → docker pull → Local Docker Image

7.  Running the Docker Container

The Docker image was used to create a running container using:

docker run -d –name jenkinstestcont -p 8084:80 jenkinstest

Here:

-   -d runs the container in detached mode.
-   –name jenkinstestcont assigns a name to the container.
-   -p 8084:80 maps host port 8084 to container port 80.
-   jenkinstest is the Docker image used to create the container.

This allowed the application inside the Docker container to be accessed
through the mapped port.

8.  Overall Workflow

The complete workflow learned on Day 5 was:

GitHub ↓ Jenkins ↓ Jenkins Workspace ↓ Docker Build ↓ Docker Image ↓
GHCR ↓ Docker Pull ↓ Local Docker ↓ Docker Container

9.  Key Learnings

-   Learned the basic integration of Jenkins with GitHub.
-   Learned how Jenkins retrieves project files into its workspace.
-   Learned how to configure Windows batch commands as Jenkins build
    steps.
-   Learned how Jenkins can execute Docker commands.
-   Learned how to build a Docker image using a Dockerfile.
-   Learned how to run a Docker container from the created image.
-   Learned about GitHub Container Registry (GHCR).
-   Learned how to store a Docker image in GHCR.
-   Learned how to pull a Docker image from GHCR.
-   Understood the basic Continuous Integration workflow using GitHub,
    Jenkins and Docker.

10. Screenshots Included

The following screenshots can be added to the Day 5 documentation:

1.  Jenkins Dashboard
    -   Shows the demo-integration-git-docker Jenkins job and successful
        build status.
2.  Jenkins Workspace
    -   Shows the files retrieved into the Jenkins workspace.
3.  Jenkins Build Configuration
    -   Shows the Docker-related build steps configured in Jenkins:
        docker build docker images docker run
4.  Docker Images
    -   Shows the local jenkinstest image and the GHCR-tagged image.
5.  GitHub Packages / GHCR
    -   Shows the jenkinstest package stored in GitHub Container
        Registry.
    -   Shows the docker pull command provided by GHCR.

Conclusion

Day 5 helped me understand how GitHub, Jenkins and Docker can work
together in a Continuous Integration workflow. Jenkins can retrieve the
source code from GitHub and execute Docker commands automatically. I
also learned how Docker images can be stored in GitHub Container
Registry and pulled back into a Docker environment. This gave me
practical knowledge of integrating source-code management, CI
automation, containerization and container image storage.
